Let’s summarize what we’ve learned in
this lecture and this lecture has been all
about forward kinematics.
That’s the problem of determining the pose
of the robot tip or the robot’s end effector
given a set of the joint coordinates, the
things that vary as the robot moves.
For a robot within joints, we denote the end
effector pose as Ksi N and it is a function
of the joint coordinates, which are vector
of length N. And, we typically denote the
vector of joint coordinates by the symbol
Q and this function which maps the joint angles
to the end effector pose, we denote by the
symbol K, K for kinematic, the forward kinematic
function.
We looked at a number of examples about how
to determine the robot tooltip pose.
We did that by drawing the robot, by taking
a reference coordinate frame attached to the
base of the robot and then walking it through
the robot mechanism.
We would rotate it and translate it from the
base of the robot through to the end effector.
We could then write down a sequence of elementary
transformations, which we could expand and
multiply out to come up with an expression
for a homogeneous transformation which represents
the pose of the robot’s end effector.
So, we did it for a simple planar robot with
just two joints and we also did it for a robot
with four joints whose end effector moves
in three-dimensional space.
We did this for a number of robots that move
in two dimensions and in three dimensions,
and hope you got the idea about how you can
write down this transformation expression
almost by inspection, just by looking at the
robot and, in your mind, walking a coordinate
frame from the base of the robot through each
of the links and each of the joints until
it get to the end effector.
It’s a very simple and very intuitive way
of writing the expression for robot end effector
pose.
We introduced the rather formal concept of
a configuration space.
As just mentioned, the configuration of a
robot with N joints is the joint configuration
vector.
The elements in that vector or an angle if
the joint is rotational, revolute, and it
is a link if the joint is prismatic or sliding.
The set of all of these vectors is referred
to as the configuration space of the robot.
It’s a subset of the N dimensional space
of real numbers where N is the number of joints
in the robot.
The other concept that we introduced is the
task space of the robot and this is the space
of all possible end effector poses.
For a two-dimensional robot, the task space
is a subset of SE2 which is the set of all
possible positions and orientations in the
plane.
For a three-dimensional robot, the task space
is a subset of SE3, the set of all possible
positions and orientations in three-dimensional
space.
For this 2-degree of freedom planar robot
arm, its configuration space is a subset of
the space of two-dimensional real numbers
because the configuration can be described
by two real numbers, Q1 and Q2.
Seu espaço de trabalho também é um subconjunto do espaço
bidimensional de números reais e isso é porque
seu efetuador pode ser descrito por dois
números reais, X e Y
Podemos descrever o espaço de configuração e de trabalho
para um robô Gantry Cartesiano com 3 graus de
liberdade e também podemos descreve-los como um
robô SCARA com 4 graus de liberdade, cujo
efetuador move em três direções.
A maioria dos robôs funcionais do mundo real, por
exemplo robôs industriais, têm 6 articulações.
Então, seus espaços de configuração são de seis dimensões.
Seus espaços de trabalho também são de 6 dimensões, o
que significa que o efetuador pode adotar uma posição
arbitrária e uma orientação arbitrária dentro dos
limites do volume de trabalho desse robô
em particular.
Existe uma restrição importante em que a
dimensão do espaço de configuração deve
ser maior ou igual a dimensão do espaço
de trabalho.
Aqui temos um exemplo de um robô onde a dimensão
do espaço de configuração é muito maior que
a dimensão do espaço de trabalho.
Nos referimos a um robô como este, como um robô redundante.
Então, embora seu espaço de trabalho seja o mesmo que
o de um robô com 6 graus de liberdade, como o robô
Puma que vimos anteriormente, é possível
adotar qualquer pose no espaço
tridimensional.
Seu espaço de configuração é muito maior.
Ele usa este espaço de configuração lógico para
que possa controlar não apenas o efetuador,
mas também o formato do braço, conduzindo
da base ao efetuador.
Nós introduzimos a notação Denavit-Hartenberg.
Isso envolve anexar o sistema de coordenadas
na extremidade de cada link no robô.
E assim, podemos escrever uma expressão para a
pose relativa entre sistemas de referência de links
consecutivos.
A notação Denavit-Hartenberg é bem concisa.
Podemos descrever a relação entre sistemas
usando simplismente quatro parâmetros.
Isso impõe uma série de restrições sobre onde
colocamos os sistemas de coordenadas dos links.
E, o sistema de coordenadas do link não necessariamente
dependem fisicamente dos links dos próprios
robôs.
A notação Denavit-Hartenberg nos permite descrever, de
forma muito concisa, qualquer mecanismo de link serial.
Então, aqui temos uma tabela bastante concisa que
descreve a cinemática de um braço manipulador de dois
links.
A tabela têm duas linhas, uma por articulação,
e têm quatro colunas, cada coluna para
cada um dos parâmetros Denavit-Hartenberg.
Uma vez que este robô é todo revoluto, significa
que todas suas articulações são rotacionais.
As coordernadas da articulação estão na coluna Theta.
Usamos uma tabela muito semelhante para um robô
mais complexo, como o Puma 560.
A tabela ainda têm quatro colunas, mas agora
têm 6 linhas, uma para cada articulação
do robô.
Então, a forma mais geral que podemos descrever
a cinemática de um braço robótico é em termos da
função cinemática K e os parâmetros dessa função é
o vetor de configuração das
atriculações.
E lembre-se, isso é um vetor que contém ou
os ângulos das articulações ou os deslocamentos
das articulações,
no caso de uma articulação prismática, e uma série
de outros vetores.
We have a vector of joint angles, a vector
of link offsets, a vector of link lengths,
and a vector of link twists, and a vector
of joint types whose elements describe whether
the corresponding joint is revolute or prismatic.
Most of the elements of Theta, D, A and alpha
are constant.
The joint configuration vector Q contains
the variables in the system and we substitute
elements of Q in to elements of Theta, or
elements of D according to the joint type
which is given by the corresponding of the
vector sigma.
Denavit-Hartenberg notation allows us to describe
links and joints by a group of four elementary
homogeneous transformations and we stack them
in end on end, one group per joint of the
robot.
In the case of a robot where all the joints
are revolute, we substitute the elements of
the joint configuration vector, the vector
Q in to the corresponding Theta elements.
For the case of a robot that has got a prismatic
joint as shown here.
We substitute the corresponding joint configuration
element in to the corresponding link of set
element, in this case, D2.
The robot kinematic function tells us the
relationship between the frame 0 and frame
6.
And frequently, we might want to relate frame
0 to some sort of factory or world reference
frame.
So, we introduce a base transform that tells
where link 0 is with respect to our world
reference frame, and we denote that by Psi
B. The forward kinematic function gives us
the pose of frame 6 and frame 6 is typically
attached to some sort of mounting plate or
flange on the end of the robot.
The actual tool, the thing that does the work,
is attached to that particular flange.
So, if we want to know the pose of the end
of a tool, the end of the thing that’s doing
the work which I’ve denoted here by frame
E, then we introduce another relative pose.
I call this KsiT and that stands for tool
transform.
We can write a pose expression for the pose
of the end effector with respect to the world
frame in terms of the base transform, the
forward kinematic function, and the tool transform.
All robots have got a finite workspace.
That’s the set of all reachable end point
positions.
All industrial robots come with a diagram
like this in their data sheet which shows
quite clearly the parts of the workspace that
they can and cannot reach.
In robotics, we’re interested in two kinematic
problems.
The forward kinematic problem has been the
subject of this lecture, and that is given
the joint angles, what is the pose of the
robot's end effector, the robot’s tooltip.
The subject of our next lecture is the inverse
kinematic problem.
That is given, when I have to design pose
of the robot’s end effector, what joint
angles do I require?